
## To Be positive forms

| I am     | I'm     |
| -------- | ------- |
| you are  | you're  |
| he is    | he's    |
| she is   | she's   |
| it is    | it's    |
| we are   | we're   |
| you are  | you're  |
| they are | they're |

## To Be negative forms

| I am not     | I'm not     |
| ------------ | ----------- |
| you are not  | you aren't  |
| he is not    | he isn't    |
| she is not   | she isn't   |
| it is not    | it isn't    |
| we are not   | we aren't   |
| you are not  | you aren't  |
| they are not | they aren't |

## To Be question forms

Swap the places of verb and pronoun.
**Ex:** You are Peter.
Are you Peter?

| Question  | Positive      | Negative        |
| --------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| Am I?     | Yes, I am     | No, I'm not.    |
| Are you?  | Yes, I am     | No, I'm not     |
| Is he?    | Yes, he is    | No, he isn't    |
| Is it?    | Yes, it is    | No, it isn't    |
| Are we?   | Yes, we are   | No, we aren't   |
| Are they? | Yes, they are | No, they aren't |

## my his her (uska, uski, unka, unki, apna, apne)

| I    | my    |
| ---- | ----- |
| you  | your  |
| he   | his   |
| she  | her   |
| it   | its   |
| we   | our   |
| you  | your  |
| they | their |

## A or an

A + constant
An + vowel

## A, An or The

**Rule 1:**
A/An => one of many
The => the only one

Ex: I want **an** apple. (from many apples)
I want **the** apple. (the only apple)

**Rule 2:**
A/An => You mention something for the first time
The => You mention something more than once

Ex: I bought **a** T-shirt. **The** (you know which T-shirt you're talking about) T-shirt is lovely. 
Can I open **a** window? Please, close **the** (specific one, which is open) window. 

**Rule 3:**
The => What you speak about is only one of its kind

Ex: Go to **the** red car. (green car, red car, blue car)

## Plurals

**Rule 1**
Singular (1/a) => car
Plural (2 or more) => car + s

**Rule 2**
Singular (1/a) => ends in s, sh or x
Plural (2 or more) => add 'es'
Example : bus => buses
bush => bushes
box => boxes

**Rule 3**
Singular : cons + y
Plural : -ies
Example : baby => babies
dictionary => dictionaries

**Rule 4**
Singular : vowel + y
Plural : -ys
Example : boy => boys

**Rule 4**
Singular : -f, -fe
Plural : -ves
Example : scarf => scarves
knife => knives

**Exceptions**
man => men
child => children
woman => women
foot => feet
tooth => teeth
mouse => mice
sheep => sheep
fish => fish

## This, That, These and Those Demonstrative Pronouns

|           | here (near) | there (far) |
| --------- | ----------- | ----------- |
| 1         | This        | That        |
| 2 or more | These       | Those       |

## A, An or Some

**Rule 1**
A/an => countable noun (singular)
Some => uncountable noun
Example: **a glass of** water (specify quantity)
**some** water (no quantity specified)

>In English **money** is uncountable, that's why we say "Money is important" and not "Money are important"

**Rule 2**
A/an => countable, singular
Some => countable, plural
Example : a chair, some chairs

## Some or Any

Some => countable, plural, +
Ex: There are **some** chairs
**Some** friends are coming

Some => uncountable
Ex: I want **some** chocolate

Any => countable, plural, -, ?, uncountable
Ex: There aren't **some** people over there (Wrong)
There aren't **any** people over there (Right)

Are there **some** people over there? (wrong)
Are there **any** people over there? (right)

>[!tip] Rules for **some** and **any** are same, the sentences they are used in is different. **Any** is used in '-' and '?' sentences

## There is or There are

There is => singular and uncountable
Example: **There is** a cup on the table.
**There is** some ice cream on the table.

There are => plural
Example: **There are** children in the zoo.

How to form questions?
Change the places of **there** and **is/are**.
Example: **There is** a knife on the table.
**Is there** a knife on the table? (Yes, there is/No, there isn't)

## Present Simple, positive

**Rule 1**
I/you/we/they => verb
he/she/it => verb + s

Example: I play outside.
He plays outside 

When: every day, all the day, usually

**Verb Rules**
- Verb - consonant + y + s => -ies. Example: cry => cries
- Verb - vowel + y + s => -s
- Verb - o + s => -es. Example: go => goes
- Verb - s/sh/tch/ge/ + s => -es. Example: manage = manages

## Present Simple, negative

Example: You **don't like** football.
She **doesn't live** in a house.

**Rule**
I/you/we/they => don't + verb
He/she/it => doesn't + verb

## Present Simple, Questions

Example: **Do you** play football?
Yes, I do/No, I don't

**Does she** live in a house?
Yes, she does/ No she doesn't

**Rule**
Do/don't=> I/you/we/they
Does/doesn't => he/she/it


|               | positive      | negative             | question           |
| ------------- | ------------- | -------------------- | ------------------ |
| I,you,we,they | I speak       | I **don't** speak    | **Do** you speak?  |
| he,she,it     | He speak**s** | He **doesn't** speak | **Does** he speak? |

## Have or Have got

>I have = I've got

Example: **I have** a dog (formal)
**I've got** a dog. (Informal, spoken English, American english)

He **has** a dog.
He'**s got** a dog 

Question form difference:
**Do** you **have** a dog? (Yes, I do/No, I don't)
**Have** you **got** a dog? (Yes, I have/No, I haven't)

Negative forms difference:
I **don't have** a dog 
I **haven't got** a dog

## 